---
layout: post
title: Http Authentication
permalink: /:collection/http/authentication
---

# Transfer Layer Security (TLS / SSL)
- Transfer Layer Security (TLS) and its predecessor, Secure Sockets Layer (SSL).
- cryptographic protocols to provide communication security over the Internet.
- TLS and SSL encrypt the segments of network connections at the Application Layer for the transfer Layer using,
  - asymmetric cryptography for key exchange.
  - symmetric encryption for privacy.
  - message authentication codes for message integrity.

# Basic access Authentication (BASIC)
- In context of an HTTP transaction.
- method for a web browser or other client program to provide a user name and password when making a request.
- Most basic way of implementing authentication, suitable when we are accessing the application both using browser and other software such as scripts.
- Browser will use its standard dialog to collect the credentials.
- Easy to implement, but credentials transmitted as plain text.
- Hence, you must have TLS/SSL or some network level encryption in place.

- Before transmitting `username:password` is Base64 encoded.
- Base64-encoded string is transmitted in the HTTP header and decoded by the receiver.
- Base64 makes them unreadable visually, but they are easily decoded.
- *Confidentiality is not the intent of the encoding step*
  - rather, the intent is to encode non-HTTP-compatible characters that a username or password may contain, into those that are HTTP-compatible.

# Digest access authentication (DIGEST)
- similar to the BASIC, a digest of the password is transmitted instead of password.
- Digest communication starts with a client that requests a resource from a web server.
- If the resource is secured with Digest Authentication, the server will respond with the http status code 401, which means Unauthorized to access this resource.

```
GET /secured/index.html HTTP/1.0
Host: localhost
Authorization: Digest username="mick",
        realm="baselogic.com",
        nonce="dcd98b7102dd2f0e8b11d0f600bfb0c093",
        uri="/secured/index.html",
        qop=auth,
        nc=00000001,
        cnonce="0a4f113b",
        response="35f308904a9a9623498f358d1cb10afd"
```
- response contains term Digest as indication.
- server also indicates the type of Digest Authentication algorithm used by the client with Quality Of Protection (QOP) and the nonce string, which is a Base64 encoded timestamp and private hash generated by the server.

```
HA1 = MD5( "mick:baselogic.com:secret key")
HA2 = MD5( "GET:/secured/index.html" )
```

# Form-Based Authentication (FORM)
- we can use our own form to collect the username and password.
- It is very flexible in terms of implementation and how we ask for the username and password, but requires extra work for implementing the forms.
- This method suffers from the same security risk as the BASIC method because the credentials are transmitted as plain text.
